{{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}/CONTRIBUTING.rst, before:

Contributing Guide
==================

This project was created using footing.
For more information about footing, go to the
`footing docs <https://github.com/Opus10/footing>`_.

Setup
~~~~~

Set up your development environment with::

    git clone git@github.com:Opus10/{{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}.git
    cd {{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}
    make setup

``make setup`` will set up a development environment managed by Docker.
Install docker `here <https://www.docker.com/get-started>`_ and be sure
it is running when executing any of the commands below.

Testing and Validation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Run the tests on one Python version with::

    make test

Run the full test suite against all supported Python versions with::

    make full-test-suite

Validate the code with::

    make lint

If your code fails the ``black`` check, automatically format your code with::

    make format

Committing
~~~~~~~~~~

This project uses `git-tidy <https://github.com/Opus10/git-tidy>`_ to produce structured
commits with git trailers. Information from commit messages is used to generate release
notes and bump the version properly.

To do a structured commit with ``git-tidy``, do::

    make tidy-commit

All commits in a pull request must be tidy commits that encapsulate a
change. Ideally entire features or bug fixes are encapsulated in a
single commit. Squash all of your commits into a tidy commit with::

    make tidy-squash

To check if your commits pass linting, do::

    make tidy-lint

Note, the above command lints every commit since branching from master.
You can also run ``make shell`` and run ``git tidy`` commands inside
the docker environment to do other flavors of ``git tidy`` commands.

Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Sphinx <http://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`_ documentation can be built with::

    make docs

The static HTML files are stored in the ``docs/_build/html`` directory.
A shortcut for opening them (on OSX) is::

    make open-docs

Releases and Versioning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Anything that is merged into the master branch will be automatically deployed
to PyPI. Documentation will be published to a ReadTheDocs at
``https://{{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}.readthedocs.io/``.

The following files will be generated and should *not* be edited by a user:

* ``CHANGELOG.md`` - Contains an automatically-generated change log for
  each release.

This project uses `Semantic Versioning <http://semver.org>`_ by analyzing
``Type:`` trailers on git commit messages (trailers are added when using
``git tidy-commit``). In order to bump the minor
version, use "feature" or "bug" as the type.
In order to bump the major version, use "api-break". The patch version
will be updated automatically if none of these tags are present.

Commit message:

Add Conda development environment support

{{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}/CONTRIBUTING.rst, after:

Contributing Guide
==================

This project was created using footing.
For more information about footing, go to the
`footing docs <https://github.com/Opus10/footing>`_.

Setup
~~~~~

Set up your development environment with::

    git clone git@github.com:Opus10/{{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}.git
    cd {{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}
    make docker-setup

``make docker-setup`` will set up a development environment managed by Docker.
Install docker `here <https://www.docker.com/get-started>`_ and be sure
it is running when executing any of the commands below.

If you prefer a native development environment,
``make conda-setup`` will set up a development environment managed
by `Conda <https://conda.io>`__. The database must be ran manually.

Testing and Validation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Run the tests on one Python version with::

    make test

Run the full test suite against all supported Python versions with::

    make full-test-suite

Validate the code with::

    make lint

If your code fails the ``black`` check, automatically format your code with::

    make format

Committing
~~~~~~~~~~

This project uses `git-tidy <https://github.com/Opus10/git-tidy>`_ to produce structured
commits with git trailers. Information from commit messages is used to generate release
notes and bump the version properly.

To do a structured commit with ``git-tidy``, do::

    make tidy-commit

All commits in a pull request must be tidy commits that encapsulate a
change. Ideally entire features or bug fixes are encapsulated in a
single commit. Squash all of your commits into a tidy commit with::

    make tidy-squash

To check if your commits pass linting, do::

    make tidy-lint

Note, the above command lints every commit since branching from master.
You can also run ``make shell`` and run ``git tidy`` commands inside
the docker environment to do other flavors of ``git tidy`` commands.

Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Sphinx <http://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`_ documentation can be built with::

    make docs

The static HTML files are stored in the ``docs/_build/html`` directory.
A shortcut for opening them (on OSX) is::

    make open-docs

Releases and Versioning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Anything that is merged into the master branch will be automatically deployed
to PyPI. Documentation will be published to a ReadTheDocs at
``https://{{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}.readthedocs.io/``.

The following files will be generated and should *not* be edited by a user:

* ``CHANGELOG.md`` - Contains an automatically-generated change log for
  each release.

This project uses `Semantic Versioning <http://semver.org>`_ by analyzing
``Type:`` trailers on git commit messages (trailers are added when using
``git tidy-commit``). In order to bump the minor
version, use "feature" or "bug" as the type.
In order to bump the major version, use "api-break". The patch version
will be updated automatically if none of these tags are present.
